specs/core/dispatch-marker.md, before:

# Engram Dispatch Marker

Status: Draft

## Problem: Multi-Party Transcript Splitting

Modern AI-assisted development rarely happens in a single conversation. A piece
of work typically crosses several distinct sessions before it touches code:

```
┌─────────────────────┐     ┌─────────────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐
│  Planning session   │     │  Coding agent        │     │  Source code │
│                     │     │                      │     │              │
│  "The scroll        │────▶│  Reads ChatView.swift│────▶│  ChatView    │
│   indicator should  │     │  Edits lines 220-240 │     │  .swift      │
│   appear after one  │     │  Runs tests          │     │  (modified)  │
│   screen of scroll" │     │                      │     │              │
└─────────────────────┘     └─────────────────────┘     └──────────────┘
       Transcript A                Transcript B
     (the reasoning)           (the implementation)
```

These sessions produce **separate transcripts** with no inherent link between
them. File-level provenance tools can trace a code change back to Transcript B
— the coding agent. But Transcript A — the conversation where the requirement
was discussed, the tradeoffs weighed, and the decision made — is invisible.

This gets worse as the chain grows:

```
┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────┐
│  Product     │     │  Orchestrator│     │  Coding      │     │ Code │
│  discussion  │────▶│  planning    │────▶│  agent       │────▶│      │
│  session     │     │  session     │     │  session     │     │      │
└──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────┘
  Transcript A         Transcript B         Transcript C
```

File-level evidence reaches only Transcript C. Transcripts A and B are lost.

## The Handoff Gap

The link is lost at each handoff because nothing in the downstream transcript
records *where it came from*. The coding agent's first message is the task
prompt — but nothing in that prompt ties it back to the conversation that
originated the work.

Without an explicit link, the only recovery paths are:
- **Timestamp proximity**: guess which upstream session overlaps in time
- **Vocabulary overlap**: hope that file names or function names appear in both

These are probabilistic and fail on common terms.

## Solution: Dispatch Marker

A **dispatch marker** is a UUID that the upstream party embeds in the handoff
message. Because the handoff message becomes the opening content of the
downstream session, the UUID appears verbatim in both transcripts:

```
Upstream session                    Downstream session
─────────────────                   ──────────────────
...conversation...                  [engram:src=f47ac10b-...]  ← same UUID
                                    Fix the scroll indicator...
tool_call: send_prompt(
  "[engram:src=f47ac10b-...]        ...agent work...
   Fix the scroll indicator..."
)                        ─────────▶
...                                 ...
```

No coordination with Engram is required at dispatch time. The UUID is just text.
Engram discovers the link at query time by searching all indexed transcripts for
the UUID string.

## Marker Format

```
[engram:src=<uuid>]
```

Where `<uuid>` is a UUID v4 generated fresh for each dispatch event.

The marker is prepended to the handoff message. One UUID per dispatch — not
per session. A session that was dispatched multiple times (e.g., after a
compaction/context reset) may have multiple UUIDs, each linking back to the
upstream context that re-initiated it.

**Example handoff message:**

```
[engram:src=f47ac10b-58cc-4372-a567-0e02b2c3d479]

Implement the scroll indicator feature. It should appear when the user
has scrolled up by more than one full viewport height, and disappear
with a fade when they scroll back to the bottom...
```

## Multi-Level Chains

The convention composes across arbitrary depth. Each handoff embeds a UUID;
each UUID independently links two adjacent transcripts. Engram can traverse
the full chain at query time:

```
Session A ──[uuid-1]──▶ Session B ──[uuid-2]──▶ Session C ──edits──▶ file.swift
              ↑                        ↑
       links A↔B                links B↔C
```

`engram explain file.swift:220-240` finds Session C, scans for dispatch markers,
finds `uuid-2`, retrieves Session B, scans Session B for markers, finds `uuid-1`,
retrieves Session A. The full chain surfaces without any of the intermediate
sessions needing to know about each other.

## Query Modes

### File/span query (developer-facing)

```
engram explain <file>:<start>-<end>
```

Finds coding sessions that touched the span, then traverses dispatch markers
upstream. Returns the full chain: code evidence at the bottom, orchestrator
conversations at the top.

### Dispatch query (orchestrator-facing)

```
engram explain --dispatch <uuid>
```

Entry point is the work unit, not a file location. Returns:
- The upstream session(s) containing the UUID (where the work was originated)
- The downstream session(s) containing the UUID (where the work was done)
- All code spans touched by those downstream sessions

This is the natural interface for anyone who dispatched the work and wants to
review what it produced — no file paths required.

## General Convention

The dispatch marker is not tied to any specific tool, framework, or workflow.
Any party that hands work to another party can embed `[engram:src=<uuid>]` in
the handoff. Engram will discover and surface the link without needing to know
anything about the parties involved.

Compatible with any workflow where:
- One session (human+AI chat, script, CI system, orchestrator agent) dispatches
  work to another session
- Both sessions produce transcripts that Engram can ingest

## Worked Example: Two-Tier Vibe Coding

One instantiation of this pattern: a chat session (where a human and an AI
discuss requirements) dispatches to a coding agent (which implements them).

```
Chat session (TARS)                   Coding agent (eezo)
───────────────────                   ───────────────────
Human: "The barge-in behavior         [engram:src=a3f2...]
  is broken — tapping during          Fix barge-in: tapping during
  speech should interrupt,            .speaking state must route to
  not cancel"                         bargeIn(), not stop()...
                                      
AI generates UUID a3f2...             Reads WatchMainView.swift
AI dispatches prompt with marker  ──▶ Edits line 229
                    UUID a3f2...      Runs build
  appears in this                     UUID a3f2... appears in
  session's tool call                 this session's first message
```

Later: `engram explain --dispatch a3f2...` returns both the chat discussion
and the coding session — the full picture from requirement to implementation.

## Implementation Checklist

- [ ] Marker embedding: upstream party prepends `[engram:src=<uuid>]` to
      each dispatch (e.g., in orchestrator tooling)
- [ ] Chain-explain: `engram explain` scans result sessions for marker
      pattern, traverses upstream, merges results with `tier` annotation
- [ ] `explain --dispatch <uuid>` query mode
- [ ] `tier` field on session results: `agent` | `orchestrator`
- [ ] Tests: multi-session fixture sharing UUIDs at each level
- [ ] Docs: reference in README and DESIGN.md

Commit message:

spec: clarify chain traversal as UUID expansion not hop-by-hop

specs/core/dispatch-marker.md, after:

# Engram Dispatch Marker

Status: Draft

## Problem: Multi-Party Transcript Splitting

Modern AI-assisted development rarely happens in a single conversation. A piece
of work typically crosses several distinct sessions before it touches code:

```
┌─────────────────────┐     ┌─────────────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐
│  Planning session   │     │  Coding agent        │     │  Source code │
│                     │     │                      │     │              │
│  "The scroll        │────▶│  Reads ChatView.swift│────▶│  ChatView    │
│   indicator should  │     │  Edits lines 220-240 │     │  .swift      │
│   appear after one  │     │  Runs tests          │     │  (modified)  │
│   screen of scroll" │     │                      │     │              │
└─────────────────────┘     └─────────────────────┘     └──────────────┘
       Transcript A                Transcript B
     (the reasoning)           (the implementation)
```

These sessions produce **separate transcripts** with no inherent link between
them. File-level provenance tools can trace a code change back to Transcript B
— the coding agent. But Transcript A — the conversation where the requirement
was discussed, the tradeoffs weighed, and the decision made — is invisible.

This gets worse as the chain grows:

```
┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────┐
│  Product     │     │  Orchestrator│     │  Coding      │     │ Code │
│  discussion  │────▶│  planning    │────▶│  agent       │────▶│      │
│  session     │     │  session     │     │  session     │     │      │
└──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────┘
  Transcript A         Transcript B         Transcript C
```

File-level evidence reaches only Transcript C. Transcripts A and B are lost.

## The Handoff Gap

The link is lost at each handoff because nothing in the downstream transcript
records *where it came from*. The coding agent's first message is the task
prompt — but nothing in that prompt ties it back to the conversation that
originated the work.

Without an explicit link, the only recovery paths are:
- **Timestamp proximity**: guess which upstream session overlaps in time
- **Vocabulary overlap**: hope that file names or function names appear in both

These are probabilistic and fail on common terms.

## Solution: Dispatch Marker

A **dispatch marker** is a UUID that the upstream party embeds in the handoff
message. Because the handoff message becomes the opening content of the
downstream session, the UUID appears verbatim in both transcripts:

```
Upstream session                    Downstream session
─────────────────                   ──────────────────
...conversation...                  [engram:src=f47ac10b-...]  ← same UUID
                                    Fix the scroll indicator...
tool_call: send_prompt(
  "[engram:src=f47ac10b-...]        ...agent work...
   Fix the scroll indicator..."
)                        ─────────▶
...                                 ...
```

No coordination with Engram is required at dispatch time. The UUID is just text.
Engram discovers the link at query time by searching all indexed transcripts for
the UUID string.

## Marker Format

```
[engram:src=<uuid>]
```

Where `<uuid>` is a UUID v4 generated fresh for each dispatch event.

The marker is prepended to the handoff message. One UUID per dispatch — not
per session. A session that was dispatched multiple times (e.g., after a
compaction/context reset) may have multiple UUIDs, each linking back to the
upstream context that re-initiated it.

**Example handoff message:**

```
[engram:src=f47ac10b-58cc-4372-a567-0e02b2c3d479]

Implement the scroll indicator feature. It should appear when the user
has scrolled up by more than one full viewport height, and disappear
with a fade when they scroll back to the bottom...
```

## Multi-Level Chains

The convention composes across arbitrary depth. Each handoff embeds a UUID;
each UUID independently links two adjacent transcripts.

```
Session A ──[uuid-1]──▶ Session B ──[uuid-2]──▶ Session C ──edits──▶ file.swift
              ↑                        ↑
       links A↔B                links B↔C
```

Explain resolves the full chain in a single call via UUID expansion: find all
`[engram:src=<uuid>]` markers in the result sessions, search all indexed tapes
for those UUIDs, add any new sessions found, extract their markers, and repeat
until the set is stable. Since all tapes share the same index regardless of
which tool or party produced them, each UUID lookup is a flat text search —
no hierarchy traversal required.

## Query Modes

### File/span query (developer-facing)

```
engram explain <file>:<start>-<end>
```

Finds coding sessions that touched the span, then traverses dispatch markers
upstream. Returns the full chain: code evidence at the bottom, orchestrator
conversations at the top.

### Dispatch query (orchestrator-facing)

```
engram explain --dispatch <uuid>
```

Entry point is the work unit, not a file location. Returns:
- The upstream session(s) containing the UUID (where the work was originated)
- The downstream session(s) containing the UUID (where the work was done)
- All code spans touched by those downstream sessions

This is the natural interface for anyone who dispatched the work and wants to
review what it produced — no file paths required.

## General Convention

The dispatch marker is not tied to any specific tool, framework, or workflow.
Any party that hands work to another party can embed `[engram:src=<uuid>]` in
the handoff. Engram will discover and surface the link without needing to know
anything about the parties involved.

Compatible with any workflow where:
- One session (human+AI chat, script, CI system, orchestrator agent) dispatches
  work to another session
- Both sessions produce transcripts that Engram can ingest

## Worked Example: Two-Tier Vibe Coding

One instantiation of this pattern: a chat session (where a human and an AI
discuss requirements) dispatches to a coding agent (which implements them).

```
Chat session (TARS)                   Coding agent (eezo)
───────────────────                   ───────────────────
Human: "The barge-in behavior         [engram:src=a3f2...]
  is broken — tapping during          Fix barge-in: tapping during
  speech should interrupt,            .speaking state must route to
  not cancel"                         bargeIn(), not stop()...
                                      
AI generates UUID a3f2...             Reads WatchMainView.swift
AI dispatches prompt with marker  ──▶ Edits line 229
                    UUID a3f2...      Runs build
  appears in this                     UUID a3f2... appears in
  session's tool call                 this session's first message
```

Later: `engram explain --dispatch a3f2...` returns both the chat discussion
and the coding session — the full picture from requirement to implementation.

## Implementation Checklist

- [ ] Marker embedding: upstream party prepends `[engram:src=<uuid>]` to
      each dispatch (e.g., in orchestrator tooling)
- [ ] Chain-explain: `engram explain` scans result sessions for marker
      pattern, traverses upstream, merges results with `tier` annotation
- [ ] `explain --dispatch <uuid>` query mode
- [ ] `tier` field on session results: `agent` | `orchestrator`
- [ ] Tests: multi-session fixture sharing UUIDs at each level
- [ ] Docs: reference in README and DESIGN.md
